blog post: Introducing tonic (#3)
LucioFranco/blog: content/blog/announce-tonic-0-1.md

---
title: "Tonic: gRPC has come to async/await!"
url: "/tonic-grpc-has-come-to-async-await"
date: 2019-10-01T10:00:00-04:00
draft: false
---

# Tonic: gRPC has come to async/await!

I am pleased to finally announce a crate that I have been working very hard on for the
past few months. [`tonic`] has finally hit the initial [`0.1.0-alpha.1`] release! Stable
releases will follow in the coming months.

### What is Tonic?

> > Tonic is a gRPC over HTTP/2 implementation focused on high performance, interoperability, and flexibility. This library was created to have first class support of async/await and to act as a core building block for production systems written in Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Tonic is a gRPC-over-HTTP/2 implementation focused on high performance, interoperability, and flexibility. This library was created to have first class support of async/await and to act as a core building block for production systems written in Rust.
```

> Tonic's prior incarnation was known as [`tower-grpc`]. It was built to satisfy [linkerd]'s need for a production ready gRPC implementation. [`tower-grpc`] was based upon the [`tower`] library, which has production uses in systems such as the [`linkerd-proxy`], [`vector`], and the [`noria`] database at MIT. The [`tower`] library has also seen usage in additional libraries such as  [`warp`], [`tower-web`], and [`actix-net`].

Reviewer: Nit
```suggestion
Tonic's prior incarnation was known as [`tower-grpc`]. It was built to satisfy [linkerd]'s need for a production-ready gRPC implementation. [`tower-grpc`] was based upon the [`tower`] library, which has production uses in systems such as the [`linkerd-proxy`], [`vector`], and the [`noria`] database at MIT. The [`tower`] library has also seen usage in additional libraries such as  [`warp`], [`tower-web`], and [`actix-net`].
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tonic's prior incarnation was known as [`tower-grpc`]. It was built to satisfy [linkerd]'s need for a production ready gRPC implementation. [`tower-grpc`] was based upon the [`tower`] library, which has production uses in systems such as the [`linkerd2-proxy`], [`vector`], and the [`noria`] database at MIT. The [`tower`] library has also seen usage in additional libraries such as  [`warp`], [`tower-web`], and [`actix-net`].
```

> Tonic's prior incarnation was known as [`tower-grpc`]. It was built to satisfy [linkerd]'s need for a production ready gRPC implementation. [`tower-grpc`] was based upon the [`tower`] library, which has production uses in systems such as the [`linkerd-proxy`], [`vector`], and the [`noria`] database at MIT. The [`tower`] library has also seen usage in additional libraries such as  [`warp`], [`tower-web`], and [`actix-net`].

Reviewer: What do you think of 
```suggestion
Tonic began its life as  [`tower-grpc`], which was built to satisfy [linkerd]'s need for a production ready gRPC implementation. [`tower-grpc`] was based upon the [`tower`] library, which has production uses in systems such as the [`linkerd-proxy`], [`vector`], and the [`noria`] database at MIT. The [`tower`] library has also seen usage in additional libraries such as  [`warp`], [`tower-web`], and [`actix-net`].
```

> With async/await’s forthcoming stabilization, we created Tonic to support the new syntax natively. This means clients out of the box will support async/await and server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With async/await’s forthcoming stabilization, we created Tonic to support the new syntax natively. This means clients will support async/await out of the box and server
```

> implementations can be defined via [`async_trait`]'s. This provides an unparalleled experience for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementations can be defined via [`async_trait`]s. This provides an unparalleled experience for
```

> writing async services quickly and efficiently. Not only does Tonic provide a fully featured gRPC implementation but it also comes with a fully featured, batteries included, HTTP/2 client and server built

Reviewer: I think this is normally hyphenated?
```suggestion
writing async services quickly and efficiently. Not only does Tonic provide a fully featured gRPC implementation but it also comes with a fully featured, batteries-included, HTTP/2 client and server built
```

Reviewer: Also, you say "fully-featured" twice in this sentence. Maybe change one of them?

> around [`hyper`], [`tokio`]and [`tower`]. Both the client and server implementation provide TLS backed by

Reviewer 2: missing space

> either [`openssl`] or [`rustls`]. The client provides load balancing, interceptors, timeouts, rate limiting,

Reviewer 2: is interceptors a common term among grpc implementations?

concurrency control and more!

> The library also boasts strong interoperability with [`grpc-go`] which contains tests for the majority of supported gRPC features. If you find a bug or would like to request a new feature please file an [issue]!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The library also boasts strong interoperability with [`grpc-go`], which contains tests for the majority of supported gRPC features. If you find a bug or would like to request a new feature please file an [issue]!
```

Reviewer: Also, I might rephrase this...I thought the purpose of the gRPC interop tests were intended to prove interoperability with _any_  gRPC implementation?

Reviewer: Also, I might put "If you find a bug..." in a new paragraph? It's not really connected to the point about interop tests...

### Features

> Out of the gate the goal for Tonic has been to provide a good batteries included experience. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of the gate, the goal for Tonic has been to provide a good batteries included experience. It
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of the gate the goal for Tonic has been to provide a good batteries-included experience. It
```

> already supports many features with many more planned! Here is a list of features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already supports many features, with many more planned! Here is a list of features:
```

- Implemented in pure Rust (minus [`openssl`] which is optional)
- Interoperability tested via [`tonic-interop`]
- Bi-directional streaming
- Custom metadata
- Trailing metadata
- Codegen via [`prost`]

> - [`tracing`] support (more to come)

Reviewer: What do you think about
```suggestion
- Exposes [`tracing`] diagnostics (more to come)
```

- Fully featured HTTP/2 client and server
- TLS backed by either [`openssl`] or [`rustls`]
- Load balancing powered by [`tower`]

> - Timeouts, rate limiting, concurrency control, etc

Reviewer: Not sure why these are grouped into one bullet point? Maybe
```suggestion
- Reliability features such as timeouts, rate limiting, concurrency control, and more
```

> - gRPC interceptors

Reviewer: Might be good to link to the gRPC docs explaining what this means?

- And much more to come

### Overview

_helloworld **client** example:_

{{< highlight rust >}}
let mut client = GreeterClient::connect("http://[::1]:50051")?;
let request = Request::new(HelloRequest {
    name: "hello".into(),
});
let response = client.say_hello(request).await?;
println!("RESPONSE={:?}", response);
{{< /highlight >}}

This shows how easy it is to build a simple gRPC client using code generated by [`tonic-build`]. Internally,
`connect` will create the most basic "channel/client" but it is possible to configure this to support
tls, load balancing, timeouts and more.

_helloworld **server** example:_

{{< highlight rust >}}
#[tonic::async_trait]
impl Greeter for MyGreeter {
    async fn say_hello(&self, req: Request<HelloRequest>)
        -> Result<Response<HelloReply>, Status>
    {
        println!("Got a request: {:?}", req);
        let reply = HelloReply {
            message: "Zomg, it works!".into(),
        };
        Ok(Response::new(reply))
    }
}
{{< /highlight >}}

> Server's are just as easy to implement! Using [`dtolnay`]'s amazing [`async_trait`] crate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Servers are just as easy to implement! Using [`dtolnay`]'s amazing [`async_trait`] crate
```

Reviewer: Consider tying this into the last example a little more closely:
```suggestion
Server's are just as easy to implement as clients! Using [`dtolnay`]'s amazing [`async_trait`] crate
```

Reviewer: Also, I might typeset this the way github does usernames:
```suggestion
Server's are just as easy to implement! Using [**@dtolnay**]'s amazing [`async_trait`] crate
```

> to allow server implementations to use `async fn` in a trait. More examples including ones with tls, authentication, and streaming are included in the [`tonic-examples`] crate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to allow server implementations to use `async fn` in a trait. More examples including ones with TLS, authentication, and streaming are included in the [`tonic-examples`] crate.
```

### Moving forward

> Today marks Tonic's first alpha release, over the next few months we will be working hard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today marks Tonic's first alpha release, and over the next few months we will be working hard
```

to ensure that Tonic is ready for production usage. A lot of the implementation has already

> been proven in production environments via [`tower-grpc`]. Over the next few months as [`tokio`]

Reviewer: I might make it clearer that it's the 0.2 branch of tokio that doesn't have a stable release yet.

> comes closer to a full stable release Tonic will follow with its own stable releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
comes closer to a full stable release, Tonic will follow with its own stable releases.
```

> ### Conclusion

Reviewer: This may be a matter of taste, but personally, I'm not a big fan of having a section header called "Conclusion" unless it's absolutely necessary...

Author: Any ideas for a better name? Maybe I could just drop it.

[`tonic`] is now available! There is [documentation], [examples][`tonic-examples`] and

> an [issue] tracker! Please provide any feedback as we would love to improve this library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an [issue] tracker! Please provide any feedback, as we would love to improve this library
```

> anyway we can!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any way we can!
```

With async/await’s forthcoming stabilization, we created Tonic to support the new syntax natively. This means clients will support async/await out of the box and server
implementations can be defined via [`async_trait`]s. This provides an unparalleled experience for
writing async services quickly and efficiently. Not only does Tonic provide a fully featured gRPC implementation but it also comes with a fully featured, batteries-included, HTTP/2 client and server built
around [`hyper`], [`tokio`]and [`tower`]. Both the client and server implementation provide TLS backed by
either [`openssl`] or [`rustls`]. The client provides load balancing, interceptors, timeouts, rate limiting,
concurrency control and more!

Tonic also boasts strong interoperability and correctness. Every commit is checked that it passes
the [gRPC interop test cases][interop-cases] against the [`grpc-go`] implementation. Hopefully, more
languages can be added in the future.

### Features

> Out of the gate, the goal for Tonic has been to provide a good batteries included experience. It

Reviewer 2: "Tonic's goal is to provide a good batteries-included experience."

Reviewer 2: ?

> already supports many features, with many more planned! Here is a list of features:

Reviewer 2: "Here is a list of features:" is redundant maybe?

- Implemented in pure Rust (minus [`openssl`] which is optional)
- Interoperability tested via [`tonic-interop`]
- Bi-directional streaming
- Custom metadata
- Trailing metadata
- Codegen via [`prost`]

> - Exposes [`tracing`] diagnostics (more to come)

Reviewer 2: You have "more to come" listed several times, maybe it's worth collecting those into the "moving forward" section?

> - Fully featured HTTP/2 client and server

Reviewer 2: Namedrop hyper again explicitly here?

- TLS backed by either [`openssl`] or [`rustls`]
- Load balancing powered by [`tower`]

> - Reliability features such as timeouts, rate limiting, concurrency control, and more

Reviewer 2: "Timeouts, rate limiting, concurrency control, and a growing set of other reliability-focused tools" ?

- gRPC interceptors
- And much more to come

### Overview

_helloworld **client** example:_

{{< highlight rust >}}
let mut client = GreeterClient::connect("http://[::1]:50051")?;
let request = Request::new(HelloRequest {
    name: "hello".into(),
});
let response = client.say_hello(request).await?;
println!("RESPONSE={:?}", response);
{{< /highlight >}}

> This shows how easy it is to build a simple gRPC client using code generated by [`tonic-build`]. Internally,

Reviewer 2: "easy" is fluff here -- do you mean 'concise'?

I don't think we know at this point what tonic-build is, so it could be a good place to introduce it casually. "The concise gRPC client implementation here refers to types generated from service descriptions by the included `tonic-build`." ?

`connect` will create the most basic "channel/client" but it is possible to configure this to support

> tls, load balancing, timeouts and more.

Reviewer 2: nit: TLS

Are there any ways in which the connections aren't configurable?

_helloworld **server** example:_

{{< highlight rust >}}
#[tonic::async_trait]
impl Greeter for MyGreeter {
    async fn say_hello(&self, req: Request<HelloRequest>)
        -> Result<Response<HelloReply>, Status>
    {

>         println!("Got a request: {:?}", req);

Reviewer 2: You reference `tracing` elsewhere, could be good to use it here? IDK.

        let reply = HelloReply {
            message: "Zomg, it works!".into(),
        };
        Ok(Response::new(reply))
    }
}
{{< /highlight >}}

> Servers are just as easy to implement! Using [`dtolnay`]'s amazing [`async_trait`] crate

Reviewer 2: nit: "just" "easy" not the most descriptive

> to allow server implementations to use `async fn` in a trait. More examples including ones with TLS, authentication, and streaming are included in the [`tonic-examples`] crate.

Reviewer 2: "The `tonic-examples` crate demonstrates more advanced cases with TLS, authentication, streaming, and more." ?

### Moving forward

Today marks Tonic's first alpha release, and over the next few months we will be working hard
to ensure that Tonic is ready for production usage. A lot of the implementation has already
been proven in production environments via [`tower-grpc`]. Over the next few months as [`tokio`] 0.2

> comes closer to a full stable release, Tonic will follow with its own stable releases.

Reviewer 2: As a reader I usually like to snoop on roadmap links or tracking issues or to have a little summary of the remaining work. Icing on the cake?

---
title: "Tonic: gRPC has come to async/await!"
url: "/tonic-grpc-has-come-to-async-await"
date: 2019-10-01T10:00:00-04:00
draft: false
---

# Tonic: gRPC has come to async/await!

I am pleased to finally announce a crate that I have been working very hard on for the
past few months. [`tonic`] has finally hit the initial [`0.1.0-alpha.1`] release! Stable
releases will follow in the coming months.

### What is Tonic?

> Tonic is a gRPC over HTTP/2 implementation focused on _**high performance**_, _**interoperability**_, and _**flexibility**_. This library was created to have first class support of _async/await_ and to act as a core building block for production systems written in Rust.

> Tonic's previous iteration was called [`tower-grpc`] and was built for the need to have a production

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tonic's previous incarnation was called [`tower-grpc`] and was built for the need to have a production
```

wdyt?

Reviewer 3: "was built from linkerd's need to have a production ready grPC implementation"

or

"was built to satisfy Linkerd's need for a production ready gRPC implementation.

> ready gRPC implementation for [linkerd]'s proxy. This spawned the creation of the [`tower`] library

Reviewer 3: Technically, tower was first, but this probably doesn't matter.

> which is now being used in production in both [`linkerd-proxy`] and [`vector`]. As well as being used in

Reviewer 4: "As well as being used in research systems such as the [`noria`]database developed at MIT" shouldn't be its own sentence. I'd make take the existing users a list instead.

research systems such as the [`noria`]database developed at MIT. The `tower` libraries have also seen a lot of maturing with the likes of [`warp`], [`tower-web`], [`tower-grpc`], and [`actix-net`] using them.

> Now that async/await is going to land onto stable Rust very soon we have completely rewritten the

Reviewer 5: ```suggest
very soon, we have completely
```

> Now that async/await is going to land onto stable Rust very soon we have completely rewritten the

Reviewer 4: When is "very soon"? Be specific.

Also, consider rewriting to

> Now that async/await is going to land onto stable Rust very soon, we have completely rewritten the...

> library to support the new syntax _natively_. This means client's out ofthe box will support

Reviewer 5: Don't need the italics for natively.

Reviewer 5: and no ' for clients

> library to support the new syntax _natively_. This means client's out ofthe box will support

Reviewer 4: Which library?

> library to support the new syntax _natively_. This means client's out ofthe box will support

Reviewer 4: > This means client's out ofthe box will support

Instead:

> This means that clients out of the box will support

async/await and server implementations can be defined via [`async_trait`]. This provides an

> unparalleled experience for writing async based services quickly and efficiently. Not only

Reviewer 5: for writing asynchronous services quickly and efficiently

does Tonic provide a fully featured gRPC implementation but it also comes with a

> fully featured, batteries included, HTTP/2 client/server built around [`hyper`], [`tokio`]

Reviewer 5: HTTP/2 client _and_ server

and [`tower`]. Both the client and server implementation provide TLS backed by either [`openssl`]
or [`rustls`]. The client provides load balancing, interceptors, timeouts, rate limiting, concurrency
limiting and more!

The library also boasts strong interoperability with [`grpc-go`] which contains tests for the majority

> of gRPC features. If you find a bug or would like to request a new feature please file an [issue]!

Reviewer 5: _gRPC's_ features

Reviewer 5: I don't think the issue link is right

### Features

Out of the gate the goal for Tonic has been to provide a good batteries included experience. It
already supports many features with many more planned! Here is a list of features:

- Implemented in pure Rust (minus `openssl`)
- Interoperability tested via [`tonic-interop`]
- Bi-directional streaming
- Custom metadata
- Trailing metadata
- Codegen via [`prost`]
- Tracing support (more to come)
- Fully featured HTTP/2 Client/Server
- TLS backed by either [`openssl`] or [`rustls`]
- Load balancing powered by [`tower`]
- Timeouts, rate limiting, concurrency limiting, etc
- gRPC interceptors

> - And others, with more being added

Reviewer 5: This could simply be "and much more:"

### Overview

> _helloworld **client** example:_

Reviewer 5: I don't think you need to italicize the whole thing

{{< highlight rust >}}
let mut client = GreeterClient::connect("http://[::1]:50051")?;

let request = Request::new(HelloRequest {
    name: "hello".into(),
});

let response = client.say_hello(request).await?;

println!("RESPONSE={:?}", response);
{{< /highlight >}}

> This shows how easy it is to build a simple gRPC client using generated code. Internally,

Reviewer 5: nit: but I think _using code generated by tonic_ reads better.

`connect` will create the most basic "channel" but it is possible to configure this to support
tls, load balancing, timeouts and more.

> _helloworld **server** example:_

Reviewer 5: Same here.

{{< highlight rust >}}
#[tonic::async_trait]
impl Greeter for MyGreeter {
    async fn say_hello(&self, req: Request<HelloRequest>)
        -> Result<Response<HelloReply>, Status>
    {
        println!("Got a request: {:?}", req);

        let reply = HelloReply {
            message: "Zomg, it works!".into(),
        };

        Ok(Response::new(reply))
    }
}
{{< /highlight >}}

Server's are just as easy to implement! Using [`dtolnay`]'s amazing [`async_trait`] crate

> to allow server implementations to use `async fn` in a trait.

Reviewer 5: You should probably mention that there is a a minimal cost of boxing the server task here, but might not be necessary.

More examples including ones with tls, authentication, and streaming are included
in the [`tonic-examples`] crate.

### Moving forward

Today marks Tonic's first alpha release, over the next few months we will be working hard
to ensure that Tonic is ready for production usage. A lot of the implementation has already
been proven in production environments via [`tower-grpc`]. Over the next few months as [`tokio`]

> comes closer to a full stable release Tonic will follow.

Reviewer 6: "release of Tonic" ?

### Conclusion

> [`tonic`] is now available! There is [documentation], [examples][`tonic-examples`] and

Reviewer 5: Documentation reference might not be right
